=encoding utf8

=pod

=head1 NAME

dbus-scrobbler - scrobble from an MPRIS-compliant media player's D-Bus interface

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  ./dbus-scrobbler
  Found a running Banshee, connecting…
  Now listening…
  [2015-08-23 10:35:51] Detected track change.
  You need to visit:
  http://www.last.fm/api/auth/?api_key=dfab9b1c7357c55028c84b9a8fb68880&token=b4fb0bd84f55ce143885a31756cc859c
  Press Enter when you have done so and authorized this app…
  [2015-08-23 10:36:18] Successfully updated nowplaying: Pet Shop Boys - Left to My Own Devices.
  [2015-08-23 10:36:18] Detected track change.
  [2015-08-23 10:36:18] Successfully scrobbled: Pet Shop Boys - Left to My Own Devices.
  [2015-08-23 10:40:40] Detected track change.
  [2015-08-23 10:40:41] Successfully updated nowplaying: Pet Shop Boys - Where the Streets Have No Name.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

I noticed that scrobbling from my media player (Banshee) broke a few weeks ago.
Banshee is written in Mono, which I have no idea about, and I'm pretty sure the
problem is with Banshee, not Last.fm (although Last.fm B<did> change their site
around).

Many modern media players such as Banshee, VLC, Audacity, XMMS2, Spotify, … now
support a thing called the Multimedia Player Remote Interfacing Specification
(MPRIS). It's a D-Bus interface so that third-party programs can control and
inspect the media players in some documented way. I decided to use it to
scrobble from. That's what this does.

B<dbus-scrobbler>:

=over 4

=item * Looks on your user session's D-Bus for an existing Banshee process to listen to.

If it doesn't find one then it waits for one to appear.

=item * Asks for authorization with Last.fm the first time this is necessary.

You'll be asked to visited the Last.fm site to authorize this application. This
session key will be cached on the filesystem forever, so you should only need
to do this once.

=item * Updates the currently playing track on each track change and then scrobbles the previous track.

=back

=head1 SESSION KEY AND AUTHORIZATION

Updating the currently-playing track and scrobbling a track both require
authorization with Last.fm's API. The first time that B<dbus-scrobbler> is run
and has occasion to send an update to Last.fm, it will look for the
B<File::HomeDir::my_home()/.config/dbus-scrobbler/sessionkey> file.

If this doesn't exist or is empty then a URL for the user to authorize the app
will be printed, and (assuming successful authorization then takes place), the
resulting session key will be stored in the file. As this session key is valid
for an infinite period of time and allows modification of your Last.fm account
you should keep it safe.

If you need to force a re-authorization then you could delete the
B<File::HomeDir::my_home()/.config/dbus-scrobbler/sessionkey> file.

=head1 TECHNICAL DETAILS

=head2 D-Bus Interaction

B<dbus-scrobbler> initially connects to your user's session D-Bus and looks for
the bus name B<org.mpris.Mediaplayer2.banshee>. As per the MPRIS specification,
each media player should request a unique bus name which begins with
B<org.mpris.MediaPlayer2>.

If B<dbus-scrobbler> does not find any such bus name then it assumes that
Banshee is not running yet. It connects to the
B<org.freedesktop.DBus.NameOwnerChanged> signal and waits for a signal that
indicates that B<org.mpris.Mediaplayer2.banshee> is now available.

Once available, the B</org/mpris/MediaPlayer2> object is used to connect to the
B<org.freedesktop.DBus.Properties.PropertiesChanged> signal. This signal fires
when the track changes (and when other events happen) and delivers a hash
reference that looks like this:

    {
        'Metadata' => {
            'mpris:trackid' => '/org/bansheeproject/Banshee/Track/11334727',
            'xesam:url' => 'file:///srv/specialbrew.localnet/srv/tank/Sounds/Songs/Andy/Lossy/Justice%20Vs%20Simian/Playlist_%20Dance/02%20-%20We%20Are%20Your%20Friends%20(Radio%20Edit).mp3',
            'xesam:genre' => [
                'Pop',
                ],
            'xesam:albumArtist' => [
                'Various Artists',
                ],
            'xesam:album' => 'Playlist: Dance',
            'mpris:artUrl' => 'file:///home/andy/.cache/media-art/album-8bbcd5e02f50ce9e5c74c93bdae8b372.jpg',
            'xesam:title' => 'We Are Your Friends (Radio Edit)',
            'mpris:length' => 159739000,
            'xesam:trackNumber' => 2,
            'xesam:artist' => [
                'Justice Vs Simian',
                ],
        },
    },

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Net::LastFMAPI>, from which all of the code for interacting with Last.fm's
API was stolen.

=head1 BUGS

Some of the most egregious shortcomings:

=over 4

=item * Hard-coded to support Banshee.

Multiple media players support MPRIS, but I don't know enough about D-Bus yet
to work out how to wait for them all to appear on the bus, so at the moment
this just looks for Banshee. It should be very very simple to alter it to work
with another player though.

=item * Should run as a daemon.

It really shouldn't be foreground on the terminal. It should be automatically
launched by the user's login process.

=item * Should have proper logging.

Instead of a bunch of crappy prints this should really have logging with
multiple priorities, possibly to syslog, and at least with an option to run in
foreground and log to stderr.

=item * D-Bus stuff could no doubt be better.

I've knocked this together in one evening because my scrobbling was broken. I
didn't know anything about D-Bus before that, other than that it's a message
bus. So the chances are I have done some really stupid things.

=item * Should use own API credentials.

Last.fm's API key application page was broken when I was writing this, so I
just copied Net::LastFMAPI's credentials. That works fine but I should really
use proper credentials once the page works again.

=item * Does not retry on transient errors.

A proper scrobbler would queue scrobbles to disk if they couldn't be submitted,
in order to retry them later. At the moment B<dbus-scrobbler> just throws them
away.

=item * Should be kinder to Last.fm.

Last.fm's API documentation says that scrobbles should only be submitted after
50% of the track has played, or 4 minutes has elapsed, whichever comes first.
There are a couple of situations—especially if you click around in your
playlist a lot or keep restarting the player—in which an extra scrobble or two
can be submitted.

=back

Please give feedback or issues at the GitHub site,
L<https://github.com/grifferz/dbus-scrobbler>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Andy Smith <andy-dbus-scrobbler@strugglers.net>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright © 2015 Andy Smith. All rights reserved. This application is free
software. It may be used, redistributed and/or modified under the terms of the
Perl Artistic License. Please see the LICENSE file for more details.

Most of the Last.fm API code copied from Steev Eeriumn's Net::LastFMAPI, under
the terms of the Perl Artistic License.
